I mentioned a moment ago
that I'm a professor
here at the Wharton
School and it's
interesting to be a professor
of finance because a lot of
the founding fathers and
mothers of the field
are still with us.
In fact, the original
founding father
of the field is still with us.
His name is Harry Markowitz.
He's in his 90s now and
he essentially invented
this whole field
of finance and
portfolio theory as
a graduate student in Chicago
back in the early fifties.
Then he won the Nobel Prize for
this work in 1990
and he still added.
I say if you go
Google Harry Markowitz
you'll see he's still
working this area,
he's working in this area
of Robo-Advising.
So I want to talk
about what it is
that Dr. Markowitz did and how it
is essentially what you will
find now under the hood
of a robo-advising app
and his insights
from the 50s are exactly
the insights we're
using today and you see
they're all about
how if you want to
invest for an expected return
you're going to have
to bear some risk.
You're going to have
You'd like to do it without risk
but that's magical thinking.
We are not doing
magical thinking.
Now, Harry Potter doesn't have to
worry about his retirement plan.
But we do know magical thinking
for us and when you,
so you're vesting for return,
you have to worry about
how much risk you're taking
and what Dr. Markowitz
showed was how to take
the least risk for
the expected return
that you are targeting.
That is the sort of
special sauce of what
robo advising is
bringing to the client.
Now that you're going to
get somewhere with no risk
or even necessarily going to
get right where you want.
Because that's
the essence of risk
that things can happen
and you're taking
a risk except that.
But at least you can take
the least risk necessary for
your expected return goals.
So to understand what Dr.
Markowitz did back in the 50s,
I need start with
the fundamental precepts or
axioms of economics especially,
as they relate to investing.
There's basically two precepts.
I don't think you're going
to find two controversial.
One of them is simply
that people always
prefer more to less.
I don't think I'm going
out on a limb there,
that people prefer more to less.
So you've got that people
prefer more to less
and then the other one
which is going to give us more
of the excitement is that,
yes people prefer more
to less but they get
decreasing amount of utility
out of the next dollar,
the more wealthy they get.
So if you have a million bucks,
the enjoyment you get
out of another dollar,
the million first dollar
isn't as much as if you
only had 1000 bucks.
You have 1000 bucks
give another dollar,
you get more enjoyment
out of that.
So you always enjoy
another dollar but you enjoy
that extra dollar at
decreasing amount as
you have more and more.
So if you were to draw
a picture where on this axis is
how much money you have
and then on this axis
is how much utility,
how much enjoyment you
get out of that money,
the line is going to go up
but it's going to go up at
this decreasing rate and
mathematician would say
it's a concave function.
Those of you who took economics
in college will
certainly remember that.
This just picture
of utility curve
which has this curve to it.
It's curving down but it's
never going downwards.
You've never have so much money
of giving more
actually less happy.
It's going up at
a decreasing rate.
So just with those two,
I think not
controversial precepts,
let's see what you
can get out of it.
Well, the main thing
you get out of
it for our purposes here,
is that people are going
to be risk averse.
By which I mean
that for generally
speaking are not going to want to
take a risk everything
else equal.
So as a thought experiment,
imagine someone offered you,
"Hey, I'm given you a choice.
You can just- I can
give you 1000 bucks,
for sure 1000 bucks or
we can make it a gamble.
So a gamble so that I flip
the coin and if it comes up
heads I'm going to
give you 2,000 bucks.
But if it comes up
tails you get nothing."
So it's the same expected value.
Either way the
expected amount I'm
giving you is a 1000 bucks.
But with that gamble,
it's either zero or 2,000.
So if you're risk
averse you'd say,
"Well, just give
me the 1000 bucks.
I don't want to take
the gamble with
the same expectation just
give me the 1000 bucks."
You can see that's going to
come straight out of
that utility curve,
with that bend to it.
You're going to want just a
1000 bucks and not the bet.
Because for
the simple reason that
you get more out of the first
thousand than out of
the second thousand.
because here is
a decreasing utility,
more out of the first thousand
than the second thousand.
So you're really not going
to want to take that bet
to risk losing the first
thousand for the chance of
getting the second thousand.
You're not going to
want to do that.
So we would call
that risk averse.
By the way, we can
be even a little
more precise about this and
maybe we'll get back
to this when we talk
later about how
robo-advisors customize.
If I want to know how
risk averse you are,
I can learn about that by
asking you questions like this.
I could say, "So you don't- if
between 1,000 bucks and
this gamble of zero,
2,000 you want the 1,000.
Well, what if it's not a
thousand What if it's 990?
Do you want 990 more
than the zero or 2,000?
You do have a 980.
How about 970?" So
I could just sort
of go down to the point
we say way, stop.
You'd rather, you're happy.
You're ambivalent between getting
970 bucks or zero and 2,000.
So there's essentially,
there's this difference there.
This 970 what we would call
your certainty equivalent.
That's an economist
would call it.
So there's a three
percent discount
from the 1,000 that it's actually
worth and the 970 it's worth to
you because of
your risk aversion.
That three percent difference
is an important number.
It tells me how risk
averse you are.
If you'd said, Not 970 but 940.
Then, that's more risk
averse and that's
information that I can use
to customize my portfolio
suggestion for you.
[inaudible] I will give you
something that's a little less
risky for your money if
you said 940 versus 970.
So we can get back to that.
So the key point for now,
is that people are generally
going to be risk averse.
So just following
up on that thought,
when you think about choosing
a portfolio for
risk averse people,
then one thing you could say
right away is that, Well,
everyone likes more
expected return
but they want less risk.
One way you can sort of
be more formal than say,
"For a given expected return
you would want to have
the lowest risk. "
Or putting another way,
"For a given risk you want to
have the highest
expected return."
That's going to be the challenge
for a robo-advising app.
How do you think about that?
How do you think about for
a given expected return
what would be
the lowest risk for which you
could achieve that and for
a given risk what's
the highest expected
return you can get?.
So in our next lecture,
we will look at how Dr. Markowitz
looked at this problem
of minimizing
risk for expected return
and how it is
that robo advisors are
going to bring this to
bear for their clients.